FIP for Ethereum accounts, addresses, and signatures (broken out of FIP-0054) (#580)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-0055.md

---
fip: "0055"

> title: Supporting Ethereum accounts, addresses, and transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Supporting Ethereum Accounts, Addresses, and Transactions
```

Author: Applied.

  - [Delegated signature type](#delegated-signature-type)
    - [Transitory validation](#transitory-validation)
    - [Payload reconstitution](#payload-reconstitution)
  - [Ethereum Account](#ethereum-account)
    - [Installation and wiring](#installation-and-wiring-1)
    - [Instantiation via promotion](#instantiation-via-promotion)
    - [Actor interface (methods)](#actor-interface-methods-1)
    - [State](#state-1)
- [Design Rationale](#design-rationale)
  - [f410 address scope](#f410-address-scope)
  - [Upgrade path towards Account Abstraction (AA)](#upgrade-path-towards-account-abstraction-aa)
- [Backwards Compatibility](#backwards-compatibility)
- [Test Cases](#test-cases)
- [Security Considerations](#security-considerations)
- [Incentive Considerations](#incentive-considerations)
- [Product Considerations](#product-considerations)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Simple Summary

We introduce two actors: the **Ethereum Address Manager (EAM)** and the **Ethereum Account** actors.
Both actors are necessary to attain compatibility with Ethereum tooling.

> We also introduce **Ethereum addresses** over the f4 address class, as well as a new **Delegated signature type** to accept native Ethereum transactions.

Author: This is outdated now.

---
fip: "0055"
title: Supporting Ethereum Accounts, Addresses, and Transactions
author: Raúl Kripalani (@raulk), Steven Allen (@stebalien)

> discussions-to: <URL>

Reviewer 2: There's not a clear need for this FIP to have its own discussion post, except that there ought to be a landing place for someone who wants to ask questions about this particular spec, etc.

Unless you want to open up a distinct comment thread, let's just direct them here: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/287

Author: I've linked to these three discussion threads here:

  - https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/388
  - https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/490
  - https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/287

- [Backwards Compatibility](#backwards-compatibility)
- [Test Cases](#test-cases)
- [Security Considerations](#security-considerations)
  - [New signature type](#new-signature-type)
  - [Inability to stably address some actors from EVM smart contracts](#inability-to-stably-address-some-actors-from-evm-smart-contracts)
- [Incentive Considerations](#incentive-considerations)
- [Product Considerations](#product-considerations)
  - [Essential for ecosystem compatibility](#essential-for-ecosystem-compatibility)
  - [Explorer adaptation](#explorer-adaptation)
  - [Exchange adaptation](#exchange-adaptation)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Simple Summary

In order to enable existing Ethereum tools to seamlessly interact with the Filecoin network, it is necessary for Filecoin to:

1. Recognize and deal with Ethereum addresses.
2. Fulfill Ethereum address expectations, both for accounts (secp256k1 public key derived) and contracts.
3. Model Ethereum's Externally-Owned Accounts (EOAs).
4. Support and validate native transactions issued by (EOAs) from Ethereum wallets.

> This FIP delivers these requirements by leveraging the f4 extensible address class (newly introduced in [FIP-0048]) to model Ethereum Addresses, managed by the **Ethereum Address Manager (EAM)** actor introduced herein.

Author: Ack, will add.

> It also introduces the **Ethereum Account** actor to represent Ethereum Externally Owned accounts, capable of acting as message senders, and a new **Delegated signature type**, which enables validating native EIP-1559 Ethereum transactions carrying an secp256k1 ECDSA signatures over their RLP encoding.

Reviewer: add reference link to EIP-1559 etherum transaction plz

Author: It's heavily referenced elsewhere, but will add it here too.

Both these elements act as extension points for an eventual fully-fledged [Account Abstraction] framework.

## Abstract

This FIP introduces three technical elements:

1. It formally defines the `f410` Ethereum address space, nested under decimal namespace `10` within the `f4` address class as defined in [FIP-0048].
   This address space is managed by the Ethereum Address Manager (EAM) actor, which also offers public methods to act as a factory for EVM smart contracts.

>    The address payload of an `f410` address is the original Ethereum address.

Reviewer: ```
/// Payload is the data of the Address. Variants are the supported Address protocols.
#[derive(Copy, Clone, Debug, Hash, PartialEq, Eq, PartialOrd, Ord)]
#[cfg_attr(feature = "arb", derive(arbitrary::Arbitrary))]
pub enum Payload {
    /// f0: ID protocol address.
    ID(u64),
    /// f1: SECP256K1 key address, 20 byte hash of PublicKey.
    Secp256k1([u8; PAYLOAD_HASH_LEN]),
    /// f2: Actor protocol address, 20 byte hash of actor data.
    Actor([u8; PAYLOAD_HASH_LEN]),
    /// f3: BLS key address, full 48 byte public key.
    BLS([u8; BLS_PUB_LEN]),
    /// f4: Delegated address, a namespace with an arbitrary subaddress.
    Delegated(DelegatedAddress),
}
```

When I see `address payload` in Filecoin, above is what comes to my mind. However, I believe you are saying that _xxxxxxxx_ in  `f410<xxxxxxxx>`  is an eth address. in the f4 fip, we refer that as `subaddress` ([here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0048.md#hashing-v-prefixing), I think we shall stay consistent

Author: @jennijuju Well pointed! Indeed this should use f4 specific terminology here (subaddress). The _payload_ of f4 is `10<xxxxxxxx>` in your example above.

   Ethereum addresses can be cast as `f410` addresses, and viceversa.

2. The Ethereum Account actor, representing an Externally-Owned Ethereum account, backed by a secp256k1 key, and capable of acting as a sender of native EIP-1559 Ethereum transactions.

>    This actor will eventually become an Abstract Account (AA) actor, once such framework is introduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This actor may become an Abstract Account (AA) actor, once such framework is introduced.
```

given that we dont necessarily have a full AA design yet, the tune here is too assertive imo

Author: Hm, we gotta capture the optionality of subjects accurately here. _If_ AA is introduced, then the Eth Account will _absolutely_ become an Abstract Account. I feel like the original text is more aligned with that interpretation.

Author: How about:

> This actor will become an Abstract Account (AA) actor, if such framework is eventually introduced in the protocol.

- [Incentive Considerations](#incentive-considerations)
- [Product Considerations](#product-considerations)
  - [Essential for ecosystem compatibility](#essential-for-ecosystem-compatibility)
  - [Explorer adaptation](#explorer-adaptation)
  - [Exchange adaptation](#exchange-adaptation)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Simple Summary

In order to enable existing Ethereum tools to seamlessly interact with the Filecoin network, it is necessary for Filecoin to:

1. Recognize and deal with Ethereum addresses.
2. Fulfill Ethereum address expectations, both for accounts (secp256k1 public key derived) and contracts.
3. Model Ethereum's [Externally-Owned Accounts (EOAs)].
4. Support and validate native transactions issued by (EOAs) from Ethereum wallets.

This FIP delivers these requirements by leveraging the f4 extensible address class (newly introduced in [FIP-0048]) to model Ethereum Addresses, managed by the **Ethereum Address Manager (EAM)** built-in actor introduced herein.

> It also introduces the **Ethereum Account** built-in actor to represent Ethereum Externally Owned accounts, capable of acting as message senders, and a new **Delegated signature type**, which enables validating native [EIP-1559 Ethereum transaction]s carrying an secp256k1 ECDSA signatures over their RLP encoding.

Author: Fixed, thanks!

The subaddress is the literal Ethereum address in binary form.

```
#
# Ethereum address in Filecoin as an f4 address
#

0x04 || 0x10 || <binary Ethereum address>
|       |       |
A       B       C

# A: address class, also termed "protocol"
# B: leb128-encoded actor ID of address manager (termed "namespace")
# C: subaddress within the namespace
```

In textual form, this is represented as follows:

```
#
# Textual form of the above address
#

"f4" || "10" || <eth address || checksum>
|       |       |
A       B       C

# A: address class, also termed "protocol"
# B: namespace as a decimal number with no padding
# C: subaddress (in this case the Ethereum address) with checksum appended, base32 encoded
```

The EAM also acts like an EVM smart contract factory, offering methods that respect the Ethereum address generation rules and semantics for the original `CREATE` and `CREATE2` mechanisms.

#### Installation and wiring

During migration:

1. The Wasm bytecode of the EAM (referred by its CodeCID) is linked under the System actor's registry under the key `"eam"`.
2. A single copy of the EAM is deployed as a singleton actor under ID address `f010`.

> 3. The EAM is allowed-listed in the Init actor as an _authorized_ delegated address manager.

Reviewer 3: BLOCKER: We also need to create the Ethereum Zero address (`f410faaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaonc6iji`) as an EthAccount:
- Assign it an ID address in the init actor's state
- Put it as an EthAccount in the state tree

Can resolve by either adding to this FIP, or pointing to another FIP that already covers this / where we plan to cover this. I think it's most relevant to this FIP though.

Author: This is already covered in the Migration section.

Author: No, sorry, it's covered in the new Migration section of FIP-0054 (FEVM runtime). I was torn about where to put it, but likely resides better here with a reference from FIP-0054?

Reviewer 3: I haven't read FIP-0054 yet (sorry!), but I think it belongs here? Seems pretty related to the specifics of the EAM and EthAccounts, but defer to you.

So long as it's specified _somewhere_ (and I confirmed that it is [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/f99bd54f8755ef4a0059ada6133f150fa19e81be/FIPS/fip-0054.md#installation-and-wiring)), I'm happy to drop this as a blocker (and am doing so now).

Author: Ack, I'll add it here too. It's a bit hard to choose for things that are in between the seams.

Author: Added.

> 3. The EAM is allowed-listed in the Init actor as an _authorized_ delegated address manager.

Author: I think the discrepancy lies in that you interpreted this as an explicit action (e.g. there is some kind of transaction that happens after which the EAM becomes authorized), whereas I intended to write this as a constraint of the code. I can see why there's confusion here. Let me rejigger this.

> 3. The EAM is allowed-listed in the Init actor as an _authorized_ delegated address manager.

Author: I've tried to bring more accuracy to this in 007f126.

#### Relationship with the Init actor

The Init actor statically recognizes the EAM as an _authorized_ delegated address manager, and allows it to call its `InitActor#Exec4` method.
Note that address managers like the EAM use the `InitActor#Exec4` method to deploy new actors with a delegated f4 address under the namespace matching their actor ID (`10` in this case).
The caller provides the subaddress as an argument to such method.
For more details, refer to [FIP-0048].

#### State

> This actor has no state.

Author: Fixed in 682e0f7.

#### Sender account

Filecoin clients and the FVM recognize the Ethereum Account as an authorized message sender. This includes components validating and executing messages, like the message pool, chain syncer, and executor.

#### Promotion

When the FVM executes the first message fulfilling the following characteristics, it promotes the Placeholder actor into an Ethereum Account by updating its CodeCID in-place, prior to executing the message.

1. The message carries a valid transitory Delegated signature.
2. The message carries nonce zero.
3. The message carries a gas limit sufficient to cover chain inclusion.
4. The `f410` address resolved from the recovered public secp256k1 key corresponds to a Placeholder actor.

The promotion remains effective even if the message itself results in an exit code other than 0, including out of gas.

Failure to meet chain inclusion gas will prevent the inclusion of the message and, therefore, will not promote the Placeholder into an Ethereum Account, even if we technically ascertained that the Placeholder corresponds to an Externally-Owned Account.

#### Actor interface

None.

#### State

> None.

Reviewer 3: Similar note about `State` as for the EAM above.

Author: Fixed in 682e0f7.

> ## Design Rationale

Reviewer 3: I don't think the upgrade path towards "full" AA is the only relevant design rationale to discuss. At the very least, I think we should reiterate (or extract and move here) some of the salient points under the Change Motivation section about wanting to to retain full Ethereum tooling and ecosystem stack compatibility with Filecoin.

Author: I considered that, but discarded it to avoid repetition. Can do if folks really want that repetition here.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I've had similar uncertainty when writing FIPs myself -- there's often major overlap between the Change Motivation and the Design Rationale (with the latter coming down to "designed so as to achieve the motivated change".

Defer to you / anyone else who feels strongly one way or the other.

Author: Are there any specific design decisions you would like to call out here? If not, let's leave it as-is. The general address manager stuff should be in FIP-0048 (the one that introduces the notion of address managers), and I don't think there are any other noteworthy decisions specific to the EthAccount actor here beyond AA.

Reviewer 4: I agree with avoiding repetition. I interpret these sections as:
- Motivation: what's the problem and why is it worth solving at all
- Design rationale: why solve it _this way_, instead of some other ways

As a technical reviewer, I would like to see more explanation of why promotion is done this way, why it can't be done a more general way from the beginning. The section could probably highlight each of the Ethereum-specific mechanisms proposed (e.g. also the transitory signature delegation), explain they are temporary, and explain why the shortcut was needed.

### Upgrade path towards [Account Abstraction] (AA)

We prototyped [Account Abstraction] solutions extensively before submitting this FIP.
This FIP preserves the key extension points that will facilitate a (projected) elegant transition to fully-fledged [Account Abstraction] (AA).

We forecast these rough steps to conduct the transition:

1. Remove Delegated signature validation logic from clients, treating the signature as an opaque blob at the client level.
2. Perform AA-specific gas preflight checks in the client before accepting the message for inclusion, or propagating via the mpool.
3. Move the Ethereum transaction signature verification logic inside the `ethaccount` actor, so that it runs on-chain.
4. Generalise the Placeholder actor promotion path so that the relevant address manager gets to indicate the promotion target. Reconcile with (3).

> 5. Trigger the signature validation logic within the FVM the sender is an Abstract Account.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Trigger the signature validation logic within the FVM when the sender is an Abstract Account.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

## Backwards Compatibility

> Backwards compatibility is not affected, as this FIP introduces strictly additive features.

Reviewer 3: FIP authors usually discuss the need for a network upgrade in this section (see a very simple example [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0044.md#backwards-compatibility)). TBH, I'm not sure this is especially useful, since I don't think we've ever had a FIP that didn't need a network upgrade, but you can match precedent if you'd like.

Author: What's the relationship between a network upgrade and backwards compatibility?

Author: There's a Migration section which covers the transition during the network upgrade.

Reviewer 3: It's "backwards incompatible" in that it's "v9 incompatible", and so needs new actors version / network version -- that's often all this section has come down to.

Don't think you should necessarily match precedent here, though.

Author: See 75b22a6.

Note that we deliberately discarded assigning `f410` addresses to non-Ethereum related actors at this stage to favor design simplicity in an already complex feature set, but we may revisit this decision in the future.

## Incentive Considerations

No incentive considerations apply.

## Product Considerations

### Essential for ecosystem compatibility

This FIP is essential to enable the product aspirations of FEVM (Filecoin EVM), concretely the seamless compatibility with existing Ethereum wallets, libraries, and tools.

### Explorer adaptation

Explorers will need to adapt to display `f410` addresses bound to actors and their respective Ethereum addresses, on actor pages, message pages, and more.

Explorers will need to recognize Ethereum Account actors and Delegated signatures.

### Exchange adaptation

Exchanges must support receiving funds from EVM smart contracts.

Exchange may choose to enable sending to `f410` addresses, and may support taking in Ethereum addresses and converting them to `f410` addresses.

## Implementation

> - The actor implementation lives in [`filecoin-project/builtin-actors`].

Reviewer 3: Can we link the appropriate branches here, with a note that they will land in main branches upon this FIP's acceptance?

Author: Done.

- The reference FVM implementation lives in [`filecoin-project/ref-fvm`].
- The reference client implementation lives in [`filecoin-project/lotus`].

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

> [Externally-Owned Accounts (EOAs)]: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/accounts/

Reviewer 3: Totally didn't know one could do this!

    pub eth_address: [u8; 20],
}
```

_Errors_

- `USR_FORBIDDEN` (18) when the caller has an f4 address but it's not under namespace `10`.

### Delegated signature type

We introduce a new `Delegated` signature type for Filecoin messages with serialized value `3`.
Delegated signatures are opaque to the protocol, and are validated by actor logic.
Delegated signatures will be used in combination with abstract account senders, once [Account Abstraction] (AA) is fully realized.
However, we establish a transitory period where Delegated signatures are special-cased.

#### Transitory validation

We establish a transitory period whereby `Delegated` signatures are assumed to be secp256k1 signatures over the [RLP] representation of a native [EIP-1559 Ethereum transaction] sent from an Ethereum Acount actor.
The RLP representation is reconstituted from the Filecoin message as specified below.
This effectively couples the `Delegated` signature type to its only possible use at this stage, but provides an extension point for the future introduction of [Account Abstraction] (AA).

Such transitory `Delegated` signatures must be verified by:

> 1. Reforming and repacking the native RLP-encoded [EIP-1559 Ethereum transaction] from the Filecoin message (original signature payload).

Reviewer 5: EIP-1559 implies EIP-2718 transaction envelopes but you might want to specifically require that to reserve the potential to add more custom transaction types in future; either your own types, or if necessary, upstream Ethereum transaction types.

However, implementing this FIP will require built-in actor changes.
We expect the CodeCIDs of all built-in actors to be altered, as a consequence of the new and adjusted logic.
The new actor code will need to be linked in the System actor, and the CodeCID of all existing actors in the state tree will need to be patched to their new counterparts.

## Test Cases

The reference implementations will include tests.

This FIP may be enhanced with test vectors covering Delegated signature verification scenarios.

## Security Considerations

### New signature type

This FIP introduces a new signature type and a new transaction format to the protocol.
That is, we introduce new pathways to initiate transactions in the system, and extend the kinds of payloads that are entitled to do so.

It is worthy to note that Filecoin already supports secp256k1 ECDSA signatures under signature type 1.
Clients are expected to reuse existing signature verification and key recovery logic.
However, what differs is the authentication logic.
The original signature payload must be reconstructed by repacking the RLP-encoded [EIP-1559 Ethereum transaction].
Any flaws in this logic is subject to security events.

> ### Inability to stably address some actors from EVM smart contracts

Reviewer 4: I don't understand this section, but discussion taken to https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/490#discussioncomment-4648606

5. Transferring value to an inexistent f1 and f3 address from a smart contract is not possible as no ID address exists yet.

Unfortunately the protocol does not offer a built-in way to fetch the creation epoch of an actor, so implementing timing guards to prevent transfers or calls to reorgable ID addresses within contracts is impossible.

Note that we deliberately discarded assigning `f410` addresses to non-Ethereum related actors at this stage to favor design simplicity in an already complex feature set, but we may revisit this decision in the future.

## Incentive Considerations

No incentive considerations apply.

## Product Considerations

### Essential for ecosystem compatibility

This FIP is essential to enable the product aspirations of FEVM (Filecoin EVM), concretely the seamless compatibility with existing Ethereum wallets, libraries, and tools.

### Explorer adaptation

Explorers will need to adapt to display `f410` addresses bound to actors and their respective Ethereum addresses, on actor pages, message pages, and more.

Explorers will need to recognize Ethereum Account actors and Delegated signatures.

### Exchange adaptation

> Exchanges must support receiving funds from EVM smart contracts.

Reviewer 4: Some don't even support receiving funds from native built-in actors like a multisig. There's not much we can do about it. I suggest dropping this, or at least softening to just being one more thing that exchanges might want to consider.
